# FEATURES OF JAVA
### INTRODUCTION TO JAVA
- JAVA build by James Gosling, Mike Sheridan, Patrick Naughton, Arthur Van Hoff at Sun Microsystems.
- JAVA 1.0 was released in 1996.
- It was first names OAK then GREEN and then JAVA(after the java coffee)
- It is based on WORA Principle (Write Once Read Anywhere)
- Its Core Principle is Object Oriented Programming

OOP = data > method
POP = method > data

OOP is a paradigm that focuses on solving the problem in terms of objects and classes -or- it determines which object or classes are needed for solution of a problem.

### ELEMENTARY CONCEPT OF OBJECT AND CLASS

#### OBJECT
> An Object can be though of as an entity having a specific identity (unique), characteristics (data members) and behavious(member methods).  


#### CLASS
> A Class is a **blueprint** that represents a set of objects that share common characteristics and behaviour.


**Example:**  
Common Noun: MAN
it refers to men without any particular distinctive feature.   
Now lets take a partcular man lets say Ramesh. Ramesh wears a red shirt and white shoes. He owns a bike.  
Here, A specific person Ramesh(object) belongs to a common category of Man(Class).

### CONCEPTS OF OBJECT ORIENTED PROOGRAMMING

* Abstraction
* Encapsulation
* Polymorhism
* Inheritance
* Modularity

#### DATA ABSTRACTION
> Data abstraction or Simply Abstraction refers to the act of representing essential features without including the background details or explanation.

Note: Abstraction is relative to user or purpose. An object may have multiple abstraction depending upon the context.

**Example:**  
Assume a student class:
it can contain details like name, roll no, age, marks, address, medical history, awards, etc.

* when we talk from the perspective of a student tracking system it is only concerned with the details like name, roll no, marks, etc.
* For extra curricular activities management system only the details like awards, talents, roll no are important rest are unecessary.

#### ENCAPSULATION
> The wrapping of Data and Functions together(characteristics and behaviour) together into a single unit(called a class) is known as encapsulation.

The only way to access these data is via the functions provided. These Functions are called **Member Functions**.

**Difference of JAVA to C:**  
Class is very similar to structures in C in C++ class is defined as a structure with both private and public variables and member methods(functions).   
**EXAMPLE:**  
in C: 
``` 
struct abcd{int x; int a;};

abcd aac;
aac.x = 12; aac.a = 15;

//we can assign values to all variables freely 
//basically anyone can directly modify the variables in the structure
// we cannot implement any limitation

```

in C++:  
```
class sample(){
    private:
        int x;
        int a;
    public:
        int b;
        void assign(int z, int k){a=z; x = k;}
};

//
//we cannot directly modify values of x and a here as they are private (hidden)
//we can easily access variable b and te function/method assign which helps us to assign values to x and a

```
Carrying Forward this interpretation to java. A Class is very secure concept which allows to combine both variables and functions together in a singe unit along with restriction on the access of data which allows us to improve security.

#### POLYMORPHISM
> It is the property which allows the same message to be sent to objects of different classes and each object can respond in a different way depending on its class.

**EXAMPLE:**  
\+ operator in java in ```System.out.print()``` acts as a concatenation operator for strings and addition operator when we add two compatible integers automatically without any user intervention.

#### INHERITANCE
> It is the capaility of one class of things to inherit of derive capabilities or propeties from another class.

**EXAMPLES:**  
Class 'Car' inherits some properties from class 'Automobiles' which inherits its properties from another class 'Vehicles'.  
* A Class from which another class has inherited details is called a **Base Class** or **Super Class**
* and The class that inherits the information from another class is called **Subclass** or **Derived Class**. A subclass inherits features common to it and defines only those features unique to it.


#### MODULARITY
> The act of dividing a program into individual components is called Modularity.


Modular means small interchangeable and interlinked parts of a system. A Perfectly Modular System will function even without any of its Modular bits.
